---
sidebar_position: 9
homework_number: 9
hide_table_of_contents: true
title: 'Homework 9 — Tree Abstractions: Trees'
---

## Skills: [6](</skills/#(6)>)

## Due

Thursday, November 6, 2025 at 6PM (Oakland) or 9PM (Boston)

## Submission

This HW, like all homeworks, is done on https://github.com and submitted on https://app.pawtograder.com. Go to Pawtograder to find the repository where the assignment should be done. Commits automatically make submissions, and feedback can be viewed on Pawtograder.

______________________________________________________________________

## Introduction

Consider the following data definition for binary trees:

```pyret
data BinTree<a>:
  | leaf(val :: a)
  | node(left :: BinTree<a>, right :: BinTree<a>)
end
```

The goal of this homework will be to write abstractions for working with binary trees.

## PART A

Finish the data design for BinTree by writing examples and a template.

## PART B

### Problem 1

Design a function called `tree-zero` that takes a binary tree and replaces all leaf values with 0; the structure of the tree should remain the same.

### Problem 2

Design a function `tree-contains` that takes a String and a BinTree\<String> that returns whether the String exists as a leaf.

### Problem 3

Design a function `tree-sum` that takes a BinTree\<Number> and returns the sum of all the numbers in the tree.

### Problem 4

While trees have more structure, like lists, they still contain elements. To demonstrate this similarity, design a function called `tree-flatten` that takes a binary tree and converts it into a list. When flattening a node, the resulting list should contain all leaves on the left side of the node before the leaves on the right side of the node.

For example, the flattening the tree below should result in `[list: 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6]`:

```
           *
          / \
         *   6
        / \
       1   *
          / \
         *   5
        / \
       *   4
      / \
     2   3
```

## PART C

### Problem 1

Design a function called `tree-map` that takes a function and a binary tree and applies the function to each value in the tree. The function should return a new tree with the same structure as the original tree, but with the values replaced by the result of applying the function to the value that was originally there.

### Problem 2

Design a function called `tree-andmap` that takes a predicate and determines whether all values in the tree satisfy the predicate.

### Problem 3

Design a function called `tree-ormap` that takes a predicate and determines whether any of the values in the tree satisfy the predicate.

### Problem 4

Design a function `tree-fold` that acts like a fold over a tree. This takes in a function to apply to leaf values, and a function to combine the results of folding subtrees. These two functions should be used to compress a given tree down to a single resulting value. It should have the following signature: `tree-fold<a, b>(leaf-fn :: (a -> b), node-fn :: (b, b -> b), t :: BinTree<a>) -> b`

A test is given below for clarity:

```pyret
check:
    tree-fold(string-to-upper, string-append, node(leaf("hello"), leaf("world"))) is "HELLOWORLD"
end
```
