---
sidebar_position: 1
day_number: 1
title: Day 1 - Numbers
---

## Skills: None

## Pre-reading: [3.1.1](%7B%7BDCIC_DOMAIN%7D%7D/getting-started.html#%28part._flags-notice-wonder%29) to [3.1.4](%7B%7BDCIC_DOMAIN%7D%7D/getting-started.html#%28part._expressions-terminology%29)
Supplementary Vide: [Numbers](https://northeastern.hosted.panopto.com/Panopto/Pages/Viewer.aspx?id=8ce31419-727a-449b-95ce-b30c00e8de34)

## Intro (10 mins)

**Goal** Describe what course is about, show Pyret environment.

This course is called "Introduction to Program Design and Implementation".

- Can anyone tell me what they think a program is?
  - written constructs, that have precise meaning -- instructions of how to do
    something, carry out operations, etc.
- What does the work Implementation here mean?
  - once you know what a program should do, how it should be organized, actually
    writing it down requires understanding precise rules. And often, the first
    time you write it down, it isn't right -- implementation also covers the
    idea of validating it, making sure it actually behaves as you expect.
- What does the work Design here mean?
  - the languages we used to write programs allow us to very quickly make
    programs that are hard to understand, possibly even by the person that wrote
    them. We use Design here to stand for skills to organize our programs so
    that they are easy to write, easy to understand, and easy to modify -- and
    this ends up being much more important (and thus, occurs first) than whether
    they "work" (the Implementation part), given "working" is usually only a
    temporary state, until requirements for the program change.

### What is Pyret?

Pyret is a programming language designed explicitly for computer science
education, and just like designing our programs results in better programs,
designing our tools can help get better results. In particular, Pyret allows us
to teach you more than we would be able to otherwise. It also provides a smooth
transition, in the latter part of the course, to programming with Python, an
industrial language that is now the most widely used language in the world.

### How do we use Pyret?

For most of the semester, we will use it via an in-browser editor provided by Github
(see TASK in wrap-up, to create a Github account!). Today, however, we'll directly use https://code.pyret.org/editor, which allows us to run Pyret code using the same interface without
an account.

All editing, throughout most of the semester, will happen in the browser.

**Show Definitions vs Interations**

Today we are going to focus on the
interactions window. We can write arithmetic **expressions** -- i.e., `2 + 3`,
`5 * 4`, `18 / 3`. These **evaluate** to values -- `5`, `20`, `6`.

Values are results, expressions are bits of code that can run to produce values.

- Note that Pyret requires spaces around operators: `2 + 3` not `2+3`.
- Also, Pyret requires use of parenthesis to disambiguate operators (no
  PEMDAS!). `(2 + 3) * 4` vs. `2 + (3 * 4)`. Note what happens if you write `2 + 3 * 4`.

## Class Exercise (40 mins)

- Calculate the area of a rectangle with length 10 and width 3.
- Calculate its perimeter.
- Note that many different expressions can produce the same value. Come up with
  three different expressions that all **evaluate** to the value 10.
- Read the beginning of https://pyret.org/docs/latest/numbers.html, on ExactNums
  vs RoughNums, and then look at some of the functions below -- unlike
  operators, a function, e.g., `num-max`, when applied to two numbers, is
  written `num-max(10,20)`. Come up with an expression that uses only ExactNums,
  but **produces** a RoughNum when evaluated.

## Wrap-up (10 mins)

- Share any errors you encountered.
- Next time: strings & images!
- TASK (IMPORTANT): create an account on github.com. Verify as a student at https://github.com/education/students.
