---
sidebar_position: 11
day_number: 11
title: Day 11 - Cleaning data
---

## Skills: [2](</skills/#(2)>)

## Pre-reading: [4.2.1](%7B%7BDCIC_DOMAIN%7D%7D/processing-tables.html#%28part._cleaning-tables%29)

### Supplementary Videos

[Cleaning Data](https://northeastern.hosted.panopto.com/Panopto/Pages/Viewer.aspx?id=248f7fdd-7d96-47a0-b548-b3470134ac25)

## Reference: For all work with tables, refer to the [Tables](/tables) page in the menu at the top of the page!

## Intro (20 mins)

- Data sources, especially if they are the result of manual entry by people,
  often have minor mistakes in them.
- Sometimes data is missing, othertimes it shows up in different ways.
- Today we'll work with this synthetic example data -- which models a subset of
  the type of data that is available to political campaigns (at least, in the United States) about voters.
- Let's start by loading it in as a table:
  ```pyret
  include csv
    
  voter-data = 
    load-table: VoterID,FirstName,LastName,DOB,Party,Address,City,State,Zip,Phone,Email,LastVoted 
    source: csv-table-url("https://raw.githubusercontent.com/neu-pdi/cs2000-public-resources/refs/heads/main/static/support/10-voters.csv", default-options)
  end
  ```
- If we look at the data, we should notice a few things are off about the data.
- For example, the party affiliation, which is often used to target outreach,
  has one column empty (which is perhaps Independent?), but also, a couple rows
  have typos!
- So if we run `filter-with(voter-data, lam(r :: Row) -> Boolean: r["Party"] == "Republican" end)`
  we see only _two_ rows, despite the original data seeming to have 3. If we
  look really closely we can see that one of the rows is `"Repbulican"` (note
  the typo).
- Let's create a new file in our `cs2000-scratch` repository, `voters.csv`, copy the contents of
  https://raw.githubusercontent.com/neu-pdi/cs2000-public-resources/refs/heads/main/static/support/10-voters.csv (open it in a new tab to copy) into it, and then fix this typo.
- Now we can change the above to `csv-table-file("voters.csv", default-options)`:
  ```pyret
  include csv
    
  voter-data = 
    load-table: VoterID,FirstName,LastName,DOB,Party,Address,City,State,Zip,Phone,Email,LastVoted 
    source: csv-table-file("voters.csv", default-options)
  end
  ```
- When we run the same `filter-with` expression now, we see the three rows we
  expect.
- Why did we change the source data, rather than trying to fix this in code?
  There are always two possible approaches -- we can normalize (remove
  distinctions between things that are "the same") in the original source, or we
  can do it in code. If there are _mistakes_ in the original data, like that
  typo, it may make sense to fix the data, rather than making our analysis more
  complicated.
- However, in other cases, like the empty Party being treated as Independent, we
  may want to do this in our analysis, but it would likely be a mistake to
  change the data, because it is possible that no party and Independent as a
  party are two different things, and later analysis would want to treat them
  separately. Let's do that.
  ```pyret
  fun blank-to-indep(s :: String) -> String:
    doc: "replaces an empty string with Independent"
    if s == "":
      "Independent"
    else:
      s
    end
  where:
    blank-to-indep("") is "Independent"
    blank-to-indep("blah") is "blah"
  end
  voters-with-indep = transform-column(voter-data, "Party", blank-to-indep)
  ```
- Now we can see our new table, where there are no blank party affiliations, but
  we have not removed the original blank from `voters.csv`.
- Even in cases of typos, it may make sense to automate corrections -- e.g., we
  can see several different forms of dates in our table. Manually correcting all
  of them is not wrong, but doing things manually always raises the possibly of introducing errors -- e.g., accidentally deleting a character that changes a date, and not realize it was done (and even without mistakes, it could be time
  consuming), whereas creating a `normalize-date` function would be more
  reliable.

## Class Exercises (35 mins)

1. There is another issue with Party -- identify & fix it!
2. Both State and Zip have a single row that has bad data. Identify what it is.
   Can this be corrected through an automated process? Or can you correct it
   manually?
3. Design a function `normalize-phone` that transforms all the phone numbers to
   the form NNNNNNNNNN (i.e., the same form as VoterId 4). Use `transform-column`
   to create a table with these normalized phone numbers.
4. Look at the DOB column -- can you normalize these (to, say, YYYY-MM-DD) in the
   same way as you did phone numbers? Why or why not? Through a combination of
   manually editing the source and transforming the column with a function,
   normalize the DOB column.
5. Now look at the LastVoted column. Unlike with DOB, there are many rows that do
   not conform to YYYY-MM-DD. While manually editing the one that is of form "Oct
   10 2022" may make sense, manually editing many rows is likely prone to error.
   Think about a strategy to transform those in other forms, likely using
   `string-substring` (multiple times, with comparisons). If you are able to
   carry out your plan, that's great, but start by making a plan (in comments).

## Wrap-up (5 mins)

- Most data needs to be filtered or cleaned in some way.
- Sometimes that is done manually, but often it is done via code.
