---
sidebar_position: 16
day_number: 16
title: Day 16 - Working with Lists
---

## Skills: [3](</skills/#(3)>)

## Pre-reading: None

## Intro (5 mins)

- Today we will continue practicing with `for each` loops.

## Class Exercises (50 mins)

1. Design a function `my-doubles` that takes a list of numbers and returns a new list
  where each element is twice what the corresponding element was in the original list.
1. Re-implement the same function as `my-doubles-map` using `map` from the
  `lists` library. Which implementation do you find clearer?
1. Design `my-string-lens`, which takes a list of strings and returns a new
  list where each element is the length of the string in the corresponding
  position in the input list.
1. Re-implement the same function as `my-string-lens-map` using `map` from the
  `lists` libray. Which implementation do you find clearer?
1. Design `my-pos-nums`, which takes a list of numbers and returns a new list
  that contains only those numbers in the original list that are positive.
1. Re-implement the same function as `my-pos-nums-filter` using `filter` from the
  `lists` library. Which implementation do you find clearer?
1. Design `my-alternating`, which takes a list of any element and returns a new
  list that contains every other element -- i.e., keep the first, skip the
  second, etc. Note: you may need _two_ mutable variables for this one -- one to
  contain the result, as normal, but the other to keep track of the alternation.
1. Can you express `my-alternating` using either `map` or `filter`?
1. Design `my-running-sum`, that takes a list of numbers and returns a list where
  each position contains a sum of the numbers in the original list up to the
  corresponding position. i.e., `my-running-sum([list: 1, 2, 3]) is [list: 1, 3, 6]`.
1. Can you express `my-running-sum` using either `map` or `filter`?

## Wrap-up (5 mins)

- `for each` loops are very expressive, but sometimes harder to understand than
  using built-in operations like `filter` or `map`.
