---
sidebar_position: 16
day_number: 16
title: Day 17 - Testing and variables that change
---

## Skills: [3](/skills/#(3))

## Pre-reading: [DRAFT:9.1.8.5.4](https://dbp.io/static/dcic/intro-python.html#(part._.Testing_and_variables_that_can_change))

## Intro (15 mins)
- All our uses of mutable variables have intentionally followed the same pattern:
  ```pyret
  fun func(lst :: List) block:
    var result = ...  # what to return if the input list is empty
    for each(item from lst):
      # combine item with the result so far
      result := ... item ... result
    end
    result
  end
  ```
- In particular, **we only use `var` inside of functions**. Why? 
- Consider we wanted to implement a function `every-third-element` that took a
  list, and returned the first, fourth, seventh, etc, elements. 
- If we wrote it as:
  ```pyret
  var count = 0
  fun every-third-element(lst :: List) -> List block:
    var output = [list: ]
    for each(elt from lst) block:
      when num-modulo(count, 3) == 0:
        output := output + [list: elt]
      end
      count := count + 1
    end
    output
  where:
    every-third-element([list: ]) is [list: ]
    every-third-element([list: 1, 3, 5]) is [list: 1]
    every-third-element([list: 1,3,5,7,11]) is [list: 1, 7]
  end
  ```
- It seems to work. But then we actually use it, adding
  `every-third-element([list: 1,3])` somewhere in our code, and suddenly two of
  our tests are now failing. Why is this happening? 
- Since `count` is defined outside of `every-third-element`, it is put into the
  top-level program directory. This means that there is only ever one `count`,
  and separate calls to `every-third-element` share the same `count`. 
- This means two things, both of which are very bad:
  1. The function no longer returns the same output depending on the same input.
     Instead, the output depends on the input **and the current state of count**.
  2. This means, more confusingly, that to understand what a given call of
     `every-third-element` does, we need to know all the calls that have
     happened before, as the program _ran_, which may not be obvious from
     reading the program (since with looping, with one function calling others,
     etc, the order and how many times a function is called can be tricky to
     figure out).
  

## Class Exercises (40 mins)

TODO -- do we want them to trace behavior _with_ confusing variable mutation
examples? Or convert them to be pure? Or both? This is a difficult objective
given the lesson is essentially "don't do this". 

## Wrap-up (5 mins)


