---
sidebar_position: 18
day_number: 18
title: Day 18 - Structured data
---

## Skills: [4](/skills/#(4))

## Pre-reading: [6.1.1.1]({{DCIC_DOMAIN}}/intro-struct-data.html#(part._.A_.First_.Peek_at_.Structured_.Data)), [6.1.2.1]({{DCIC_DOMAIN}}/intro-struct-data.html#(part._struct-data-eg)), [6.1.2.2]({{DCIC_DOMAIN}}/intro-struct-data.html#(part._.Annotations_for_.Structured_.Data)), [6.1.3.1]({{DCIC_DOMAIN}}/intro-struct-data.html#(part._.Extracting_.Fields_from_.Structured_.Data)) 

## Intro (10 mins)
- Many pieces of information consist of multiple parts that should be kept together. 
- e.g., in tables, the row consists of several values. But, this same idea is useful outside of tables.
- Consider, for example, a record of a book used by a library program -- which has a title, author, and number of pages. 
- We can define a new type of data for a `BookRecord` using a language feature called `data`:
  ```pyret
  data BookRecord:
    | book(title :: String, author :: String, pages :: Number)
  end
  ```
- This defines both the type of data (`BookRecord`), for use in type
  annotations, and a way of constructing it -- `book`, which is a function of
  three arguments (`title`, `author`, and `pages`) that returns a new piece of
  data of type `BookRecord`.
- For example, we can create three `BookRecords` as:
  ```pyret
  the-dispossessed = book("The Dispossessed", "Ursula K. Le Guin", 387)
  to-the-lighthouse = book("To the Lighthouse", "Virginia Woolf", 209)
  brave-new-world = book("Brave New World", "Aldous Huxley", 268)
  ```
- The field names are used to access the parts of the `BookRecord`, using the
  dotted "field access" notation:
  ```
  the-disposesssed.pages # evaluates to 387
  ```

## Class Exercise (45 mins)
- Design a function that returns a "summary string" for a book, including the
  title, author, and pages.
- Design a function `is-long-book` that returns a boolean if the book has more than 350 pages.
- Design a new data type for a `Podcast`, and figure out the fields that make
  sense to include in it.
- Design a `podcast-summary` that produces a string summarizing a `Podcast`.
- Design a `Recipe` data definition, and then write a `row-to-recipe` function
  that consumes a `Row` from the following table:
  ```pyret
  include csv
  recipes = load-table:
    title :: String,
    servings :: Number,
    prep-time :: Number
    source: csv-table-url("https://pdi.run/f25-2000-recipes.csv", default-options)
  end
  ```
- Test your function using `recipes.row-n(0)` or some other number, and 
  then use it to add a new column with `build-column.`


## Wrap-up (5 mins)
- Structured data groups multiple fields together.
- We define structured types using `data` and create instances by calling the constructor.
- Fields are accessed with the dot notation.
