---
sidebar_position: 4
day_number: 4
title: Day 4 - Functions
---

## Skills: [1](</skills/#(1)>)

## Pre-reading: [3.3](%7B%7BDCIC_DOMAIN%7D%7D/From_Repeated_Expressions_to_Functions.html)

## Intro (10 mins)

- Functions allow us to express repeated expressions that differ in some way.

- e.g., I can write a function that says "Welcome to class, " and then someones
  name, and then use it for many different people.

  ```pyret
  fun welcome(name):
    "Welcome to class, " + name
  end
  ```

- Just like definitions, functions are added to the program directory. When you
  use a function: `welcome("some-name")` (ask for a name from the room)
  the expression evaluates to the body of the function, with the
  arguments added to a **_local_ version of the program directory used just while the function is running**.

- i.e., in the above example, at the start of the program the program directory
  is empty. (DRAW A DIAGRAM) After evaluating the `fun...end`, the program
  directory now has a single entry, which associates `welcome` to a function
  value. Evaluating `welcome("some-name")` next turns into `"Welcome to class, " + name`, but with `name -> "some name"` added to the program directory
  temporarily. Now when we evaluate the expression, `name` will be replaced with
  "some-name" and then the two strings will be put together. After that string
  is produced, as a value, the body of function has ended, and thus `name` is
  removed from the program directory. This means that if you try to use `name`
  after, it won't work.

- Observe what happens if you call `welcome` with a number. You get an error,
  but where is the error pointing to?

- The issue is that since `welcome` doesn't indicate anything about the
  type of argument it expects, the error that Pyret reports is from inside --
  in a call to `+` -- when really, the problem is the call to
  `welcome`.

- To fix this, we should put **type annotations** on all functions we write --
  both to clarify to ourselves (and other people reading the code) what type of values we expect, but
  also to allow Pyret to report better errors in case of mistakes. We should also
  indicate the type of value we are going to return!

  ```pyret
  fun welcome(name :: String) -> String:
    "Welcome to class, " + name
  end
  ```

- This is another example of Design -- and is the **first step of our actual
  design recipe for functions**. All **functions should have type annotations, and
  they should actually be the _first_ thing that we figure out**, as until we
  understand the type of data that we are working with, trying to do anything
  else is likely not going to go well.

- Another thing that all functions should have, and the **second step in our
  design recipe, is a "documentation string" (or docstring)** -- this is a
  concise, English explanation of what the purpose of the function is. Not
  necessarily how it works (though the distinction is subtle), but what someone
  who wants to use it needs to know.

- Further refining our example:

  ```pyret
  fun welcome(name :: String) -> String:
    doc: "Returns a greeting addressed to the given person"
    "Welcome to class, " + name
  end
  ```

## Class Exercise (40 mins)

- Your goal is to draw an image of a three layer cake. Each cake consists of
  three equally sized rectangular layers, and the only difference is the color
  (or "flavor") of each layer. You can choose the colors!

- Now, draw another cake with different flavors (i.e., colors). Notice what is
  different, and what is the same.

- Define a new function, `three-layer-cake` that takes as arguments the three
  parts that change: the color of the top, middle, and bottom colors.

- Be sure to give it a type annotation and docstring.

- Now use this new function to rewrite both of your past examples, and notice
  how much easier it is to read even though the behavior is the same: this is
  your second example of Design -- just like constant definitions can make
  expressions easier to read, by splitting large expressions into smaller parts
  or giving meaning to numbers, functions give names to repeated computations.

- Your next task is to write a function to calculate the cost of printing a t-shirt, which can\
  have a message written on it. Each shirt costs $5.00 plus an extra $0.10 per
  character printed on it.

- First, write an expression for 4 t-shirts with the message "Go Team!".

- Now make another expression, this time for 7 t-shirts with the message "Hello World"

- Are there are numbers that should be definitions? So-called "magic numbers"
  that aren't obvious what they mean are always good candidates for creating
  definitions -- do that now (there should be two!).

- Now, look at the two expressions, and figure out what changes between the two,
  and write a function, `tshirt-cost`, that takes as arguments the parts that
  change.

- Start with the type annotation -- think about what type the arguments should
  be. Next write down a docstring. Finally, write the expression for the body!
  Be sure to only include the part that changes, so that once you rewrite your
  original expressions to use your new function, the only repeated part is the
  name of the function!

## Wrap-up (10 mins)

- Functions allow us to not repeat ourselves; more importantly, **they are our first, and in this class, primary, example of a mechanism for abstraction** -- i.e., building a re-usable piece of a program, that has internals that are not visible to other parts of the program. **Abstraction is one of, if not the most, important ideas in computer science.**
- Type annotations allow us to clarify and communicate what kind of input each parameter expects.
- Docstrings communicate what the function does, in a clear, simple way.
- These serve both as a guide to others, but more importantly, as a guide to
  YOU! As thinking through the inputs / outputs **before** writing the function,
  and describing what the function should do, helps you figure out how to
  implement it.
