---
sidebar_position: 6
day_number: 6
title: Day 7 - Introduction to tables
---

## Skills: [2](/skills/#(2))


## Pre-reading: [4.1.1]({{DCIC_DOMAIN}}/intro-tabular-data.html#%28part._.Creating_.Tabular_.Data%29) \& [4.1.2]({{DCIC_DOMAIN}}/intro-tabular-data.html#%28part._.Extracting_.Rows_and_.Cell_.Values%29)

## Intro (15 min)

**Goal** Learn about tabular data, creating tables literally, importing data, extracting rows and cell values.

- Many everyday pieces of data -- like a workout journal, recipe index, or
  library catalog — are naturally represented as **tables**, a type of data
  where there are many **rows** where each row has the same set of attributes,
  called **columns**.
- Tables are values, just like numbers, strings, images, and booleans, and small ones can be directly typed into Pyret as:
  ```pyret
  workouts = table: date :: String, activity :: String, duration :: Number
    row: "2025-04-01", "Running", 30
    row: "2025-04-02", "Yoga", 45
    row: "2025-04-03", "Cycling", 60
  end
  ```
- Note that after the `table:` comes a list of columns, with optional type
  annotations. This is then followed by a sequence of rows, that each must have
  exactly the columns mentioned at the beginning.
- Since tables are values, they can be the input and output of functions, and
  can be used in examples. An important detail: when comparing tables for
  equality (like in test cases) the order of rows matters! 
- We can use `check: ... end` to write a set of tests not associated with a function, and use that to see: 
  ```pyret
  check:
    table: date :: String, activity :: String, duration :: Number
      row: "2025-04-01", "Running", 30
      row: "2025-04-02", "Yoga", 45
      row: "2025-04-03", "Cycling", 60
    end
    is-not
    table: date :: String, activity :: String, duration :: Number
      row: "2025-04-03", "Cycling", 60
      row: "2025-04-01", "Running", 30
      row: "2025-04-02", "Yoga", 45
    end
  end
  ```
- To deal with external files, we need to first `include` a Pyret piece of
  functionality that is not enabled by default to handle tables represented as
  "comma separated values" (CSV) files.
- Then we can use `load-table:`, rather than `table:`, and rather than listing
  the rows, specifying that they come from a csv file (in this case, from a URL,
  but in HW and lab, often it will be a file in the same project, using
  `csv-table-file`).
  ```pyret
  include csv
  recipes = load-table:
    title :: String,
    servings :: Number,
    prep-time :: Number
    source: csv-table-url("https://pdi.run/f25-2000-recipes.csv", default-options)
  end
  ```
- In addition to printing the whole table (or a prefix, if the table is long),
  you can extract a row from it by writing `table-identifier.row-n(N)` for some `N`.
  The first row is numbered `0`, the last is one minus the number in the table.
  ```pyret
  second-workout = workouts.row-n(1)
  # -> Row: date = "2025-04-02", activity = "Yoga", duration = 45
  ```
- From a row, you can extract a column values using `row-identifier["column-name"]`, e.g.,
  ```pyret
  second-workout["activity"]  # -> "Yoga"
  # or all at once:
  workouts.row-n(1)["duration"]  # -> 45
  ```
- There are also built-in functions that compute results -- e.g., `mean` takes a table, a column name, and 
  returns the average of all values in that column. `median`, `modes`, `sum`, and `stdev` exist as well!
  ```pyret
  mean(workouts, "duration") # -> 45
  ```

## Class Exercise (40 mins)
- Find a CSV on https://data.boston.gov/, copy the URL, and create a table from it. Look for a dataset that is of moderate size (10s to 100s )
- The number of columns must match the CSV -- if it doesn't, Pyret will report an error. Fix the table declaration and re-run.
- Use the interactions window, `.row-n`, and the column extraction to explore
  the data a little bit.
- Check the total number of rows with `table-identifier.length()`. What happens
  if you try to do `table-identifier.row-n(M)` for `M` that is greater than the
  total number of rows?
- Similarly, try extracting a column that doesn't exist. 
- There is probably at least one column that has numeric values (if not, find a different data set, and import it!). Experiment with one of the functions like `mean`, `sum` on that column.


## Wrap-up (5 mins)
- Tables are an extremely common and powerful form of data. Today we just
  learned how to look at them; in the upcoming days we will see how to program with them!
