---
sidebar_position: 8
day_number: 8
title: Day 8 - Functions over rows
---

## Skills: [1](</skills/#(1)>), [2](</skills/#(2)>)

## Pre-reading: [4.1.3](%7B%7BDCIC_DOMAIN%7D%7D/intro-tabular-data.html#%28part._.Functions_over_.Rows%29), [4.1.4.1](<%7B%7BDCIC_DOMAIN%7D%7D/intro-tabular-data.html#(part._.Finding_.Rows)>), [4.1.4.2](<%7B%7BDCIC_DOMAIN%7D%7D/intro-tabular-data.html#(part._.Ordering_.Rows)>)

## Reference: For all work with tables, refer to the [Tables](/tables) page in the menu at the top of the page!

## Intro (15 mins)

- Consider we have the following table:
  ```pyret
  orders = table: time, amount
    row: "08:00", 10.50
    row: "09:30", 5.75
    row: "10:15", 8.00
    row: "11:00", 3.95
    row: "14:00", 4.95
    row: "16:45", 7.95
  end
  ```
- Let's say we want to find orders that are "high-value" (e.g., amount >= 8).
- To do this, we want to create a _new_ table with rows that satisfy this. With
  a small table, we could do this manually, i.e.,:
  ```pyret
  high-value-orders = table: time, amount
    row: "08:00", 10.50
    row: "10:15", 8.00
  end
  ```
  But if we have hundreds or thousands of orders, this is impractical.
- Better is to design a function that checks if an order is high-value, and then
  use a table operation, `filter-with`, to create a new table that contains only
  rows that satisfy the function.
  ```pyret
  fun is-high-value(o :: Row) -> Boolean:
    o["amount"] >= 5.0
  where:
    is-high-value(orders.row-n(2)) is true
    is-high-value(orders.row-n(3)) is false
  end
  ```
- Now we can use `is-high-value` with a table operation, `filter-with` to construct a new table:
  ```pyret
  new-high-orders = filter-with(orders, is-high-value)
  ```
  This constructs the same table as we did by hand:
  ```
  check:
    new-high-orders is high-value-orders
  end
  ```
  But this approach will work on tables that have hundreds, thousands, or even millions of rows.
- Another built in operation on tables is `order-by`. This takes a table, a column name,
  and a boolean to indicate if the rows should be ordered in ascending or descending
  order by the given column. We can use this to sort by amount:
  ```pyret
  order-by(orders, "amount", true)
  ```

## Class Exercise (40 mins)

- Design a function `is-morning` that checks if the `"time"` column in a row
  represents a morning. Note that `<` works for strings, using "lexicographic" (i.e., character by character)
  ordering. Now produce a new table that is only morning orders.
- Create a table where the orders are sorted by time from latest to earliest,
  rather than how the original table is sorted. Use `order-by`, rather than
  constructing it by hand.
- Write code to extract the amount of the latest morning order.
- Load the data from the following url (see notes from yesterday for review):
  `https://pdi.run/f25-2000-photos.csv`
- Now filter rows that have the subject "Forest" to create a new table.
- Order the resulting new table by date, and extract the location from the most recent row.

## Wrap-up (5 mins)

- Operations on tables, like `filter-with` and `order-by`, allow us to easily
  use code to work with large sets of data by restricting to certain subsets and re-ordering them.
- Next class we'll see how else we can transform tables!
