---
title: Day λ
---

For today, we are going back to foundations -- some of the oldest, and most fundamental and fascinating ideas in the entire field of computer science.

To get there, we have to talk about a few people. 

The first, you may have heard of, Alan Turing. Turing was a mathematician and logician by training, and like many logicians around that time -- in the 1930s -- he was fascinated by the problem of how you expressed reasoning in mechanical ways. Now, remember -- there were no computers, so this was entirely on paper, on chalkboards, or described from person to person, but it was these people that enabled the breakthroughs that allowed computers to be built. 

Turing did many things -- he's famous for at least three that are worth mentioning --
1. From the very beginning, he was fascinated by the idea of thinking machines. He devised a test for whether a machine was intelligent. 
2. During WWII, he helped figure out how to leverage machines (essentially, pre-computers) to crack what was previously unbreakable Nazi encryption.
3. Relevant to today, he established fundamental results related to what can be expressed by a computer program. 

He also, after WWII, was publicly prosecuted because he was gay and had no interest in hiding it. He was then prevented from being involved in any further work on the work on computers that were being built based on the experience during the war, denied entry to the US based on the conviction, and forced to undergo hormone treatment. Just a few years later, at age 41, he took his own life. It's worth reflecting on this, both to remember the ugliness that exists within our society, not so long ago, and to think about how much more Turing may have done in a society that accepted him -- the astounding quantity he accomplished in essentially 20 years of work is such that the highest award in computer science is named after him -- who knows what he would have done if he had continued to work into the 60s and 70s, once actual computers existed. It's also a good reminder for us to reflect on how many people may have never entered the field -- we are so lucky that Turing did, and gave us these brilliant ideas, even if the high profile that it gave him ultimately led to such prosecution.

A fascinating example of one of the fundamental results about computer programs, Turing proved what is now known as the Halting Problem, which was one of the first so-called impossibility results. What it says, essentially, is that it is impossible to construct a program that, given another program as input, can determine whether the given program will run forever. What was so interested about that (and it parallels work by logician Kurt Godel with other impossibility results) is that even while he and others were establishing the immense generality of this new idea of computation, they already were figuring out that there were fundamental limits. There were programs that were impossible to write. Not, difficult, or, they didn't know how to write, but mathematically impossible, with proof. 

Computation is, indeed, deep. From the same era -- 1937, mathematician Lothar Collatz presented this seemingly simple problem:

Does the following program run forever on any integer, or does it terminate for all?

```pyret
fun collatz(n :: Number) -> Number:
  if n <= 1:
    n
  else if num-modulo(n,2) == 0:
    collatz(n / 2)
  else:
    collatz((n * 3) + 1)
  end
end
```

It's a simple program. You could have written it by the first week of class. And yet, we are 88 years later and we still don't know. 

Part of what Turing did was create a universal model of computation, which is now called the Turing machine, which is a idealized model of a machine (it cannot be constructed in reality) that is capable of expressing any program that can be expressed on any machine. 

But, perhaps even more fascinating, that era involved many different universal models of computation, and one of Turings other results was showing that his Turing machine was equivalent to another -- the Lambda Calculus of his PhD advisor, Alonzo Church. 

The lambda calculus, unlike a Turing machine, can and has been used in computation -- indeed, most languages can express it. It involves three things, all of which you have used in Pyret:

- lambda (anonymous functions)
- variables (necessary for lambda, really)
- function application (to use the lambdas)

And that's it. What Church and Turing showed was that with these three things, and _nothing_ else, any program could be expressed. 
    
Now, if you pause and reflect a little, this probably seems impossible. Don't we need numbers, and strings, and booleans, and conditions, and adding, and for loops, and **recursion**, and any number of other things that you've learned this semester? 

The goal of today, and next class, is to show you that you don't. This is a fascinating and fundamental result, and demonstrates the power and flexibility of computation.

Let's begin. 

### Booleans

While we started class back in September with numbers, booleans are simpler data, so we begin our exploration of the lambda calculus with booleans. 

We want to be able to write programs like:

```pyret
true

true and false

if true:
  true
else:
  false
end

if not(true) or false:
  false
else: 
  true
end
```

In order to do that, we need a way of expressing, using just our three tools (lambda, variables, application), `true`, `false`, `and`, `or`, `not`, and `if`.

If we focus on `true` and `false`, these are _values_. i.e., they don't evaluate. Our only _value_ in the lambda calculus is... lambda. So it must be that:

```pyret
true = lam(...): ... end
false = lam(...): ... end
```

I write `=` here -- what I mean is that we are going to have a value (a `lam`) that _represents_ `true` and `false`. We won't have `true` and `false` in our language, but we can use these particular forms of `lam` to write programs that express boolean logic. i.e., all the examples above should be expressible with whatever choice we make.

Clearly, these two values should be _different_ (true is not false). 

If we set that aside for a second, and think about `if`, or specifically, that we want to be able to express:

```pyret
if COND:
  THEN
else:
  ELSE
end
```
Where `COND`, `THEN`, and `ELSE` are expressions -- `COND` should be a boolean, `THEN` and `ELSE` don't need to be. What `if` is doing, fundamentally, is using `COND` to decide whether to evaluate to `THEN` or to `ELSE`. How can we possibly express this _decision_ when all we have are lambdas, variables, and function application? 

The answer to both of these questions ends up being the same. If a boolean is a function of _two_ arguments that returns only _one_ of them, depending on whether it is `true` or `false`, then `if` can work by _applying_ the boolean it gets. 

Let's make this concrete:

```pyret
TRUE = lam(x y): x end
FALSE = lam(x y): y end

IF = lam(c,t,e): c(t,e) end
```

If we apply this to a concrete example, like one of the ones we wanted to be able to express:

```pyret
if true:
  true
else:
  false
end
```

We can translate that to our lambda calculus representation as:

```pyret
(lam(x, y): x end)(lam(x, y): x end, lam(x, y): y end)
```

And if we _run_ this, then we apply the first `lam`, substituting the two arguments for `x` and `y`. The latter isn't used at all in the body, and so the program evaluates to:

```pyret
lam(x,y): x end
```

Which is our representation of `true` -- exactly as desired.

One issue with testing this -- while we can, on paper, evaluate function application, if we use Pyret to do it, we run into an issue -- functions are not printed out in the interactions window, so we can't see what the end result is. 

One way around this is to add a little bit of code to convert _back_ to ordinary Pyret booleans from what we can now call **Church Booleans**. 

```pyret
fun tobool(cb):
  cb(true, false)
end
```

If we call `tobool(...)` on one of our lambda calculus booleans, we will get back a normal Pyret boolean. This means we can, for example, take our previous example and wrap it appropriately:

```pyret
tobool((lam(x, y): x end)(lam(x, y): x end, lam(x, y): y end))
```
And get back `true` as expected. The other thing we can do to make it easier for us to work with our lambda calculus definitions is define _constants_. Since these can always be substituted, using them isn't changing the fact that we are only using lambda, variable, and applications, but they can make reading
the code a lot easier. 

So we can define:

```pyret
TRUE = lam(x,y): x end
FALSE = lam(x,y): y end
```

This allows us to rewrite our previous example as:

```pyret
tobool(TRUE(TRUE, FALSE))
```

So how do we do `and`, `or`, and `not`? 

Well, each should be a function, `and` and `or` both take two booleans and return one boolean. `not` takes a boolean and returns a boolean. 

So,

```pyret
AND = lam(b1, b2): ... end
```

What should it do? Well, if `b1` is true, then it should return whatever `b2` is. If `b1` is false, it should return false. 

If `b1` is true, we know it is a function that returns its first argument, so in that case, we'd want it to be:

```pyret
AND = lam(b1, b2): b1(b2, ...) end
```

What should the second argument be? Well, if `b1` is true, it doesn't matter. But if `b1` is false, then it will ignore its first argument (so its fine if its `b2`), but it will return whatever its _second_ argument is. What do we want it to return? `false`! So let's make it:

```pyret
AND = lam(b1, b2): b1(b2, FALSE) end
```

`or` is similar -- except now if `b1` is true, we want to return true, and if it is false want to return whatever `b2` is:

```pyret
OR = lam(b1, b2): b1(TRUE, b2) end
```

For `not`, we have a single boolean argument, and if we get true as input, want to return false, and if we get false, want to return true.

How can we do that? Well, we know that true will return its first argument, so:

```pyret
NOT = lam(b): b(FALSE, ...) end
```

And if we get false, then we know it will return its second argument, so we can complete as:


```pyret
NOT = lam(b): b(FALSE, TRUE) end
```

So, we can express booleans. Let's move on to numbers -- specifically, we'll stick to natural numbers (0,1,2,...).

### Numbers

Again we have task of representing values, this time things like:

```pyret
0
1
2
3
...
1 + 2
3 * 4
...
```

Let's focus on the numbers. Again, they are values, so we need to figure out a way to represent them with lambda, i.e.:

```pyret
ZERO = lam(...): ... end
ONE = lam(...): ... end
TWO = lam(...): ... end
...
```

And it should work for any natural number! How can we do that? One idea would be to have the number correspond to the number of arguments, i.e., 1 would be a one argument function 2 would be a two argument function (and whose body did...)... but since we can't create functions of dynamic number of arguments, it would seem to be impossible to implement something like `+`. 

A better idea is to have each be a function with two arguments: a function and a value and have the function be _applied_ a certain number of times to the value. Not in a row (since, until we implement mutation, running a function once and then running it again will produce the same result), but _nested_. i.e.,

```pyret
ZERO = lam(f, x): x end
ONE = lam(f, x): f(x) end
TWO = lam(f, x): f(f(x)) end
...
```

Now, clearly we can construct any natural number this way -- pick a number and nest the calls the right number of times. 

We can even create a helper `ofnum(..)` that takes a Pyret natural number and produces one of these (essentially -- it's not technically the exact same code, but it behaves the same way, and is extremely convenient for our understanding), and a corresponding `tonum(..)` that goes the other way:

```pyret
fun ofnum(n :: Number):
  lam(f, x):
    fun r(m):
      if m == 0:
        x
      else:
        f(r(m - 1))
      end
    end
    r(n)
  end
end

fun tonum(cn) -> Number:
  cn(lam(y): y + 1 end, 0)
end
```

Now, of course, in order for these to be useful, we need to be able to express `+` and `*` (and others!), so lets do that, starting with `+`.

Addition takes two numbers and returns one, so we can start with:

```pyret
ADD = lam(n1, n2): ... end
```

Now, what should the result be? Well, we want a function `lam(f,x): f(f(...f(x))) end` where there are `n1 + n2` copies of `f`. Now, we know that `n1` and `n2` have this form already, but if we are going to be able to do anything with them, we have to apply them, so somehow it seems like we will need a _new_ `f` and `x` to work with. So lets expand our solution to:

```pyret
ADD = lam(n1, n2): lam(f, x): ... end end
```

So how can we get the inner applications? Well, if we apply `n1(f,x)`, this should give us back `f(f(...f(x)))` where there are `n1` copies (where we interpret `n1` as a number). If we want another `n2` applications of `f`, we can pass this as the starting value (the `x`) to `n2`, and we get:

```pyret
ADD = lam(n1, n2): lam(f, x): n2(f, n1(f, x)) end end
```

How do we do multiplication? There are multiple ways of doing it, but one is noticing that `n1 * n2` is the same as _adding_ `n2`, `n1` times, starting at 0.

i.e.,:

```pyret
MUL = lam(n1, n2): n1(lam(y): ADD(n2, y) end, ZERO) end
```

This would mean if we had 4 multiplied by 3, this is the same as:

```pyret
ADD(THREE, ADD(THREE, ADD(THREE, ADD(THREE, ZERO))))
```

To confirm, we can use our conversions:

```pyret
check:
  tonum(MUL(ofnum(5), ofnum(6))) is 30
end
```

What about subtraction? Before we try to do `n - m`, let's do a simpler thing -- implement `n - 1`. 

```pyret
MINUS1 = lam(n): ... end
```

Somehow, this has to take a function `lam(f, x): f(f(...f(x))) end` and return `lam(f,x): f(...f(x)) end` -- i.e., apply the function one fewer time. 

How can we do that? Well, the easiest way to do it is actually to take a slight detour, to define our first _structured_ data (which we can do, of course!) -- a pair of two values. 

Essentially, we want to define three things:

```pyret
PAIR = lam(a,b): ... end
FIRST = lam(p): ... end
SECOND = lam(p): ... end
```

Where the ideas is that pairs are _created_ with `PAIR`, and then one of the two values that was stored in the pair can be gotten out with `FIRST` or `SECOND` respectively. 

How do we do that? Well, the idea is similar to how booleans work -- `PAIR` will create a lambda function, and then `FIRST` and `SECOND` will apply it in the right way (in this case by passing in functions that cause the right value to be passed back). Let's see:

```pyret
PAIR = lam(a,b): lam(z): z(a,b) end end
FIRST = lam(p): p(lam(a,b): a end) end
SECOND = lam(p): p(lam(a,b): b end) end
```

We can confirm this is working using some of our other helpers, i.e.,:

```pyret
check:
  tonum(FIRST(PAIR(ofnum(10), ofnum(5)))) is 10
end
```

Why do we want pairs anyway? Well, the trouble with trying to subtract one is that, with church numerals, that amounts to applying a function _one fewer time_. 

i.e., if the input is `lam(f,x): f(f(f(x)) end`, we want the output to be `lam(f,x): f(f(x)) end`. 

A very clever idea (due to another logician working around the same time, Stephen Kleene) was to construct, at each step, a _pair_ of the current step and the next step. Then getting the previous step amounts to extracting the first part of the pair. 

Let's see:

```pyret
MINUS1 = lam(n): lam(f,x): FIRST(n(lam(y): PAIR(SECOND(y), f(SECOND(y))) end, PAIR(x,x))) end end
```

```pyret
check:
  tonum(MINUS1(tonum(10))) is 9
end
```

Now we could implement general substraction using the same strategy as we did for multiplication -- by repeatedly subtracting 1, but let's move on, to one last task we'd like to be able to do: check for equality. 

As before, we'll start with a small problem -- just checking if a number is equal to 0.

```pyret
EQUAL0 = lam(n): ... end
```

How can we do that? Well, we want to return a boolean -- true if it is 0 and false in all other cases. In this case, we can use the fact that numbers are composed of `f(f(...f(x)))`, i.e., if it is 0, then it is just whatever `x` is, and if it is non-zero, it is some number of applications of `f`:

```pyret
EQUAL0 = lam(n): n(lam(y): FALSE end, TRUE) end

check:
  tobool(EQUAL0(ZERO)) is true
  tobool(EQUAL0(ofnum(10))) is false
end
```
