---
sidebar_position: 1
hide_table_of_contents: true
title: Lab 1 — Emojis
---

## Skills: [1](</skills/#(1)>), [12](</skills/#(12)>)

## Purpose

Introduce pair programming, start programming with Pyret

## Introduction

In this assignment, you’ll use the provided images and image composition functions (`above` and `overlay-align`) to build a “FACE” image. You’ll also critically think about representational harm by reflecting on how your custom emoji face could inadvertently reinforce stereotypes or marginalize certain identities.

## Problem 1

Use the given images of a head, eyes, nose, and mouth, and `above` and `overlay-align` functions to define a constant FACE that is an image with two eyes, a nose, and a mouth.

You can load an image that is a file in the VSCode side bar using `image-file`, e.g.:

```pyret
MY-DEFINITION = image-file("name-of-file.png")
```

## Problem 2

Define a constant EAR and place two of them on your face, defining a new constant FACE-WITH-EARS. Note how in using a constant we only have to draw it once and get to use it twice!

## Problem 3

As users, we use emojis to communicate. We represent ourselves and our thoughts with these digital images. As (hypothetical) software developers, emojis will require us to consider data representation and storage.

Below is a stakeholder matrix for emoji design (this means, it has both stakeholders -- groups of people -- and their interests / values). Stakeholders (those who have some interest or value at stake when it comes to emoji design) are listed in the left column. The interests or values corresponding to the stakeholders are listed in the right column. Complete this stakeholder matrix for emoji design (you must fill in two stakeholders that correspond to the interests/values listed).

This means, figure out _what group of people_ has the listed interest. You are _not_ designing an emoji, you are figuring out who would want an emoji to have the particular characteristic.

| Stakeholders | Interest/Value |
| -- | -- |
| Stakeholder 1 | Simplicity |
| Stakeholder 2 | Representation |

NOTE: write your solutions as comments, e.g.,:

```
# stakeholder1: so and so
# stakeholder2: someone else
```

Secondly, explain a conflict: Explain (1-2 sentences) how these two interests/values can come into conflict when we are designing emojis (again, write this in a comment in your file). What we mean is, making emojis that are _both_ simple and representative may be challenging to do. Why?
